Okay, so we are here with Armando Rendon.
Did you go by Dr. Rendon or just Armando?
No, I got a JD, but I don't.
Oh, okay.
It doesn't matter.
All right.
Well, so today's September 6th.
Let's start off with your name and age.
Armando Rendon.
I'm 80 years old.
born in 1939 1939 wow um they're still around well i'm not just that but i'm considering like most of the people that i've interviewed are born in the 40s uh i or you know really early 50s so this will be a good opportunity to get kind of a a
Well, not that you're not part of that generation, but a little bit older than most of the people.
And so you had mentioned a little bit earlier, you were born in Texas, in San Antonio.
Can you tell me a little bit more about kind of your, where you were born and raised, what that was maybe like?
I was born in the West Side Barrio, it's called the West Side in San Antonio.
And I was
basically raised in the house that my grandfather built and was raised pretty much by my grandmother and my mother and had five uncles and two aunts.
So they all took part in raising me.
The house, in fact, was built by my grandfather.
He was a Kickapoo Indian, full-blooded.
And my grandmother was from a place called Abasolo in Coahuila, which is right next to Texas.
And somehow they met way back then.
They crossed the border, in fact, in 1903.
I already had my oldest aunt, Romana.
She was already, I guess, just a little kid, maybe even a baby still.
I moved into with my grandmother's father who was living in San Antonio.
I assume it was in the west side.
Most Mexicans that came in from cross-border would settle in the west side.
It was kind of the closest to the border, about 150 miles closer.
And the north side, and of course the north side was predominantly Anglo.
That's the way it was.
So for this project of my oral history, I really kind of have two main questions.
So the first main question is whether or not whether, but how do you see yourself as a participant of the Chicano movement?
Or do you consider yourself a participant of the Chicano movement?
Yes, I'm very much so in a couple ways.
One is someone who promoted the movement.
I wrote about it.
I took part in some phases of it.
especially the, being in California, the great boycott.
I met Cesar Chavez about 1964.
He recruited me, among others,
which I did by helping organizing or in helping organize protests when the boycott started, got involved with that and so forth.
I also was, I think, a participant as an observer, which
It was actually my career goal to become a journalist, which I did.
My first job was as a reporter for a weekly newspaper in Sacramento.
And one of the reasons that I ended up there with my family, because my wife and I married in 61,
and moved up there toward the end of 61.
And I began working for this newspaper.
It's called the Catholic Herald.
It was a diocesan newspaper.
And I was actually their only full-time reporter.
I actually went out and got stories and that sort of thing.
That was my first job in journalism.
In fact, that's how I met Cesar Chavez, because I heard about this fellow coming up to Sacramento, and I thought I'd do a story on him, what he was doing.
He just sucked me right in.
I realized he was a real thing.
But I began to take notes and do stories.
I got involved in actually, this was about 1964-65 that I helped organize and started an organization called REAP.
R-E-A-P.
Rural Education and Advancement Program.
And this was the time of the war in poverty.
which you wouldn't remember.
You might have heard of it.
There were some monies being given out for different projects like that, but it was mostly funded by the diocese of Sacramento, Catholic diocese.
And in fact, my wife and I, we had, I think we had at least two kids by then.
Yeah.
We spent a summer in a little town called Hood, which is near the river.
It's down by some of the other towns.
Maybe it's like 15, 20 miles down the Sacramento River where there's all kinds of little towns along there.
And it's populated mostly by probably, I think, settled out Mexicans, African-Americans from the migrant stream.
Is that north of Sacramento?
South.
Oh, south.
Okay.
It's below it.
Still in Sacramento County.
And we work with other people in the city and so forth to bring up services like, you know, kids program, teaching kids little things, you know.
having programs for the mothers and the fathers and, you know, that sort of thing.
It was just a lot of fun.
And thank goodness my wife, you know, agreed to do it.
Because we actually moved our household down there and found a little place to stay.
But, so yeah, I think all of that, you know, went into...
into my mind, you might say my brain and memory as observations, which a reporter is trained to do, you know.
So that was my, that's why I say I think I was both an observer and a participant.
So observer in your kind of capacity as a journalist,
and a participant in your capacity of organizing.
Can I ask you about your meeting with Cesar Chavez?
What was it about that meeting that then led you on this path to be more involved and want to do more observing of the movement itself?
Well, he had something about him.
People call it charisma.
I felt that he was really an honest person.
And he was certainly talking about issues that I sort of knew about, but I hadn't really got involved with in terms of farm labor issues and treatment of migrant workers and that sort of thing.
I had done a little bit of
research because of my job, but I hadn't really gotten into it before that.
So, obviously I did more, I don't think I did that many more stories, but I started writing about it and it influenced my perspective on the world, let's put it that way.
Having met Sasar and
I knew him over the years until, you know, his death.
He was definitely an influence on me, as he was for many people, you know.
So that meeting, and it was, I think he basically had come up
to meet with contacts that he had in Sacramento or the people that were involved, like down in Delano, in that area, were aware of up here.
I don't know if he had ever gotten up here before that as such.
He might have done so because his family was migrant, so they might have come all the way to Sacramento and picked tomatoes or whatever.
I remember, in fact, doing a story about the harvesters, and I'll never forget seeing one of the worker's hands
And most of them, you know, green from the pesticides and the tomatoes all mixing in, you know.
Yeah, just things like that and the kind of places they lived in.
Shacks, you know.
I mean, you wouldn't put a, nowadays, you know, you wouldn't think of putting a dog in, something like that.
Right.
You had families living in these places, you know.
Yeah.
So this was something that you were experiencing before your encounter with
Yeah, I knew someone who had been living in Sacramento County.
And, you know, being part of other efforts that had been made, or not actually had been made, but there was a recognition of, like, the Catholic Church to go out and help migrant workers and their families.
So I did that.
But it all just, what's the word, informed, you know,
Yeah, well, I was just going to ask a clarifying question about, because it sounds like you're working a lot with the Catholic Church.
So was it that kind of being part of that community, the church community that then kind of exposed you to, okay, here's what's going on with these laborers.
And now I've got this job with the Catholic Herald, and there's this other stuff going on down in Delano, and I'm going to go check that out.
Is that how it... Well, actually, it actually goes back a little bit farther back in that when I went to Sacramento to work for that job, the idea of the editor, Amard Gallagher,
He had gotten some money, you know, some funding from the Archdiocese to hire somebody to actually do stories.
Because before that, they were mostly doing, you know, social stuff and sports events going on in the church, you know, like.
holidays or holy days would come up and they'd have stories about that.
So because of my background, I had been in, when I was in college, going back to high school, I always worked on the high school or the college paper.
Mm-hmm.
I was editor of the Collegian, which was the St.
Mary's College newspaper as a junior.
And so, which was a little early.
Usually it was a senior that got the job.
But yeah, I've been so closely involved that when it came open,
our advisor asked me if I would be the editor.
I said, sure, you know.
So I'd been, you know, doing story even when I was in high school and so forth that were different than just social events or sports or the food is bad on the campus, that sort of thing.
So I think Amar hired me
specifically to go out and do some stories to, you know, get something, some of the issues.
And the Vatican too was, you know, in the works at that time.
So it was all these things going on.
And I was happy as, you know, as it can be because I had the whole,
And I did stories on the prisons, I did stories on the mental institutions, the stories on autism.
I remember doing a story on
football helmets, you know?
I mean, anything that came along, I was interested in alcoholism.
I didn't always... But one time, there was a... I heard about a cursillo.
Do you remember cursillos de cristiandad?
Okay.
Cursillos.
Cursillos, like little courses, little cursillos.
And it was a movement that started in Spain.
What it was, it was about two or three days of really intense interaction among men.
It started among men, but then women got into it.
You know, the church relented or something, they said, oh yeah, we'll do it for women too.
You know, we're talking about the early 60s, of course.
I won't say it very much has changed, but at any rate,
And so the Curcios were intended to sort of revive Catholicism among the poor.
I think they were distinctly, I recognize distinctly that they are intended for anybody, but certainly the poor and the less educated
people that needed more, like, greater knowledge about the Catholicism, for one thing.
It was certainly aimed at them, but I heard about it, and it sounded like a story, you know?
So in order to cover the story, I attended one of these corsios, and I had a...
a lot of impact on me.
So that's where this thing about observer and participant sort of really get mixed up, right?
But it made my Catholicism much more active, is one thing.
And that's another source of influence, you might say, that, again, sort of molded my future activities, you know.
So when my wife went to Corsillo and all that, so when they, obviously when the idea of, which I,
I basically came up with the idea of having the summer program.
We were both very much committed to that kind of stuff anyway.
We got other people involved.
In fact, even this young woman who had been a babysitter for our kids since we had our first child in Sacramento, she got involved.
She's still in the front.
We talked for her.
An hour or two every now and then.
But she lives in Washington State.
So are these curcillos, are they kind of like evangelist types of mediums?
Well, I don't know if you want to put it that way.
I think they're an intense short course in Catholicism, you know.
Like different teachings, different readings, things like that.
Right, the men themselves become involved in it.
So they become roistas, that was the term.
Royos is a phrase for like a presentation.
Sort of like maybe a sort of thing of a homily or something to activate.
I did some of those.
Like you were leading those?
Well, I became one of the organizers.
I would help organize them.
And I would present Arroyo once in a while.
So, yeah, I became very much involved.
And I think as far as my Catholicism, it had a big impact.
But I've written about this in, in fact, Chicano Manifesto.
It really put me in touch with my own people.
for like maybe the previous 10 years or so, I hadn't really spoken much Spanish, for one thing.
I got away from it, moving from San Antonio to Oakland, California, and then San Leandro.
It wasn't like it is now, let me put it that way.
So I
I get some royals in Spanish, and I had to deal with these guys who were, you know, they'd been braceros, they were, you know,
definitely blue-collar types, you know.
But, you know, the phrase, salt of the earth.
So, yeah, so it's kind of like, I shouldn't use the word, barriers, but just certainly, you know, lack of contact with my own people, so to speak, you know.
So they had that influence also.
So what was, it sounds like you're saying that when you went out there and started attending or going to these that you had, that it somehow kind of brought you together with your own community, right?
And so I guess maybe my question would be
What was it about, like, so what brought you from San Antonio to the Bay Area that there was a moment where you were disconnected?
Exactly.
Because I spent the first 10 years in San Antonio.
Mm-hmm.
And Spanish was my first language.
I think I started to learn it when I was pretty young because all my uncles and aunts and my mother were pretty fluent, you know.
I think all of them had completed high school, so they had some grounding educationally.
But the only person at that time who would
going beyond high school was my aunt, one of my aunts who became a nun.
She took college courses and that sort of thing.
I was probably the second in the family who actually went to college and completed college.
But when I left San Antonio, yeah, I moved here and there was hardly anybody to talk to in the school I went to, the parochial school.
There were like four, maybe three or four Mexican kids too, Mexican-American kids, including myself.
So, and you didn't really talk, you know, in school.
I mean, I came from San Antonio, from Texas, where you weren't supposed to talk, you know, on school grounds, right?
You get punished and whatnot.
So, I had that, you know, to deal with, but also...
It wasn't taught in school.
None of the teachers were bilingual.
So, yeah.
And then my mother, she tried to keep me speaking Spanish, but got to the point where she would speak to me in Spanish and I would respond in English.
So I knew what she was telling me, but I was embarrassed or just not comfortable or whatever.
So I lost any real fluency that I should have had if I had kept it up.
And that was here in the Bay Area?
Right, right.
So how did, what brought your family over here from?
It was just my mother.
She moved out here during, it's a long story, long family story.
But she moved out here during World War II.
It was probably two by then.
She came out here and worked in the industry, in the military industry, or what do you call it, the war industry.
Yeah.
She assembled parachutes.
down in Alameda.
They had, you know, the naval place down there.
Her favorite line was that, because, you know, she packed parachutes, right?
She said, I never got a complaint from anybody.
You know, kind of droll of humor.
Yeah, but that's kind of the first job she got when she moved out here.
It was a lot of...
personal story behind that.
Suffice to say that by the time I was 10, she'd been, you know, trying to get a job and find a nice place to live and all that sort of thing.
So finally, by the time I was 10, she felt like she wanted me to come out and join her.
So that's how I ended up coming out here.
And I was about, I started, I think I started fifth grade here.
So I was, what, 10 years old.
You said you went to St.
Mary's College?
I went to St.
Mary's College.
That's the St.
Mary's here.
Moraga.
Yeah, yeah, okay.
I went to St.
Mary's High School, too.
There's a St.
Mary's in San Antonio, right?
Sure, it's a St.
Mary's University.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Okay, yeah, I just wanted to be clear on that.
Okay, so that's really interesting.
Yeah.
when you were talking about uh the the stories that you were interested in covering as a journalist right um it sounded kind of like like what would you say was the theme of those stories to me like i hear what you're saying and i think the theme is like some kind of social justice there's some social
social justice aspect to each of these stories that you're trying to investigate?
Yeah, no, I think that's what was driving me.
Like I say, my education at St.
Mary's was definitely formative in that regard.
I was in a program which had started just a year before I got into it, which was based on the great books.
the curriculum basically that started at University of Chicago.
I think St.
Mary's must have been maybe the first or second school outside of Chicago that instituted that kind of program.
So through the great philosophers, poets and writers and so forth over a course of four years,
By virtue of that, I got a degree in English, but I took so many other courses which were combined into this program that I had two minors, one in philosophy and one in psychology.
It doesn't mean I have to go, you know, like,
But the program didn't really have a, what do you call it, a degree status, let's put it that way.
So it was a combination of different courses in the different parts of the school, plus the one that's sort of the core.
that were used, that really focused on what you would call the great books, starting with Homer and then all the way up, Aristotle, Socrates, or Plato, and so forth.
So that really was very formative as well in terms of how I looked in the world.
And Vatican II came along and I was involved with...
not so much covering it, but certainly writing synopses of whatever, just doing whatever I was asked to do.
So when I met Cesar again, I already had that inclination.
I mean, I was already devoted or dedicated to social justice issues.
And my wife and I had both been doing different activities, actions, really.
to promote social justice, certainly in Sacramento County.
But with this, I think it gave me more of a broader perspective, you know, on what needed to
there that only me canos could deal with.
When you say that Cesaro kind of recruited you, does that mean that you became like some kind of official?
I don't want to say biographer, but somebody who followed the UFW strikes or different things like that.
No, I wouldn't call myself that at all.
I was too far away from day-to-day stuff.
I became a friend of his over the years.
I didn't see him every now and then.
In fact, I probably saw him more in Washington, D.C.
than I did.
Because he came out there, you know, pretty often.
And then I would visit out here and such.
But yeah, he was always a great influence.
You know, I consider him a friend.
And a mentor.
Not so much me talking to him, but following him and really devoting myself to the kind of issues that he had.
So he came out looking for people to help him, and I happened to be part of the catch.
He threw out the net.
So that's...
a brown like 1964, 1965 and that kind of area, mid sixties.
So what, um, what then, or how do you see that being connected to what eventually becomes kind of like the full blown Chicano movement?
Right.
Yeah.
Well, it wasn't, there wasn't a Chicano movement.
They didn't really get out there until about late, actually late sixties with the, um,
When it became, you know, Chicano became a thing.
But there were a lot of people ready for it.
I mean, just thank you for something to grab onto.
I had, by that time, in 67, I was recruited by the U.S.
Commission on Civil Rights for a job in their public affairs press office.
in Washington, D.C.
And strangely enough, the reason that I was at this particular convention, it was, I think it was MAPA.
New MAPA?
American Political Association?
Okay.
I can't remember exactly where the heck it was, but it was...
Is that an offshoot of, like, Luzak, the mop-up stuff?
No, it's a political... I can't think of all the people that were involved with it, of course, but there was a conference, and I went to attend it, again, looking for a story.
Plus, I was interested, you know, Chicano, or at least I was a Mexican-American, an activist, I said.
And apparently there was somebody...
I know who it was, but this fellow was recruiting for the commission, and he was asking around for somebody or people with different kind of skills, and I guess he asked the right person if he or they knew somebody that was a reporter or had that kind of background, and they told him, well, check Rondon, you know.
So he handed me down, and
We started chatting.
I said, yeah, I'm interested, you know.
Tell me more about it and so forth.
So we did a phone interview, and they sent me a letter asking me if I would join the commission.
Because I told Helen about this, my wife.
and we didn't know what would happen if some guy just came and talked to me
But sure enough, they offered me a job, which at that time, it was a pretty great salary, you know, even though it was like, I wouldn't say how much it was.
But nowadays, it'd have to be a sizable amount of money to drag me from here to go to Washington, D.C.
At that time, it was announced that we said, yeah, well, and she was game, so we, we, we,
I accepted the job and they shipped all our stuff out there, which was, you know, part of the deal.
And so I ended up in Washington, D.C.
in 67.
So a lot of stuff that happened with the farm workers, with some of the other, like, I did go to Denver later on, but I hadn't, I was, like, involved at that time and just, you know, this new job and
learning how to deal with Washington, D.C.
So that was a whole different change, right?
From Sacramento to Washington, D.C.
Sort of a culture climb.
We thought everything was just so fast.
We were so busy.
What's going on?
That was before we had to go out of New York City.
It was something that was like that.
So that was...
a big change for us and I got involved with
Politicos, you know, in D.C.
Ed Roybal, for example, I met him.
He was one of the first congressmen from California.
Gonzalez from San Antonio.
And then I started meeting other people that had also been recruited out of the Southwest.
And see, that's an interesting thing, too, that...
there was some activity with affirmative action right and sort of started with with kennedy but when johnson came in lyndon johnson he was from texas and you know he knew mexicanos mexican americans uh and so he was more i think more open to uh to the idea of yeah you know getting more mexican americans into into government because at that time it was probably a hard
I can't remember his first name, but it'll probably come to me after we finish.
So there was only one from Congress and then Ed Roybal.
So there were just a handful of Mexicanos there.
But then when Johnson came in, he was pressed by Mexicanos more and more to hire more Raza.
and he you know he put out an order to the agencies on an executive order i guess you'd call it um saying that they had to go out and recruit mixed americas in the southwest to be part of the commission no no to be part of the federal government oh i see in other words he had all the agencies right on the orders to just start doing that that's why this fellow uh the name of sam simmons
came out here to these conventions and so forth to look for people like myself.
So you're saying he was doing kind of an affirmative action, trying to fill different positions in different departments.
I think Kennedy might have done a little bit, because he had the Viva Kennedy drives and all this during his campaign.
But I don't believe he had, maybe he didn't have a chance either.
And just to clarify, you said that that was the U.S.
Commission on Civil Rights?
Yes.
Is that right?
Okay.
I started meeting Mexican-Americans from throughout the Southwest, Midwest, and lifelong friends.
A lot of them have passed away now, but yeah, so I started to get an idea of what was going on around the country.
Because of my job at the commission, I got a chance to travel to different places, like my hometown.
I really hadn't been able to travel that much to San Antonio.
uh, San Antonio, uh, South, South Texas, California, uh, even into, uh, Midwest.
I went to Chicago, to, um, Michigan, uh, to Washington, Washington state, uh, Oregon, uh, of course, California, uh, New Mexico, Denver.
So I started to like, um, make these, these trips, which are often or, uh,
you know, related to commission work.
I mean, I was doing some kind of research because one of the things that I was asked to do with a fellow who was hired about the same time I was, was to start a magazine, right?
And this was called the Civil Rights Digest.
And it consisted of stories
something not as formal as the research and findings that they would publish, you know, from their hearings and so forth.
These were more like anecdotal or, you know, on-the-scene types of reporting of some activity going on that had to do with civil rights.
So I got to do that.
And by the way, you know, I started meeting people like Riestegeri,
José González, José Ángel Gutiérrez who was one of the key guys
So I started meeting all these people.
I met Dolores Huerta, of course, here.
Just a whole range of people that were very active in the movement.
By this time it was a movement, by the 67 and 69.
And I think most people don't realize that it didn't really hit
They kind of started at 65 because there was some protests going on and this and that.
But it didn't really start to gel as a movement until the late 60s.
And then it really got going.
So yeah, if it hadn't been for this fellow Sam Simmons, Lyndon Johnson sending Sam out.
I think he told Sam, you go out and get Rendon.
So we moved out there and I started getting all these contacts.
And as I was going along, I was keeping notes and whatnot and picking up articles and newspapers that were being published at the time, all that kind of thing.
And by 1969,
I had gotten the idea that somebody should be writing this down, you know.
And so I said, well, why don't you do it to myself?
So you kind of took on the mantle of like an archivist, right?
Or like a current.
Like, yeah, I was often on the scene of events that were key to the movement, you know.
Uh-huh.
I was down in South Texas when Mayo was organizing.
And that morphed into the La Raza Unida.
And of course with the boycott.
I went to one of the Christopher Justice meetings in Denver.
Just things like that were going.
And Reyes Tijerina, I met him.
kind of in the midst of all that was going on with the Glangrad movement, you know?
But before they attacked that prison in Pera Maria, things like that.
So in a way, I was observing and recording, but I was also realized, like I said, by the late 1969
maybe it was earlier than that because let's see what came out in 71 I guess it was early 69 that I got the idea of writing a book about it which would become Chicano Manifesto yeah so it kind of sounds like
what happened or what the story you were telling about the cursillos right that you went to go do a story on this and then kind of found yourself immersed in it as well right or eventually immersed in it would you say that kind of occurred with the chicano movement stuff and you're
kind of the activism within it or your, you know?
Well, yeah, I think it was a process that I was involved with and I had a good sense to kind of keep observing and not become totally involved in it because, you know, you can get involved in something to understand that you lose sight of
So I was, so I've never committed to one aspect of the movement or the other, because it was, you know, the kind of movement was a number of moving parts.
Right.
It wasn't just, you know, one solid mass of people on one thing.
Mm-hmm.
It was more of, I'm going to talk about these things.
I've been reading through it.
Yeah, but it was, uh, now do you have the latest edition?
Uh, I have... 96 edition?
I have this edition.
Yeah, that's the latest one.
Okay.
I might have to reprint it for, uh, it came out in 71, so two more years, it'll be 50 years that it came out.
Yeah.
Yeah, you're going to have to do a 50th anniversary.
Right, right.
I don't want to hear more about the 50th anniversary.
Um,
Because, you know, I'm really focused on getting people to think about the next 50 years.
Right, right.
Well, you could include your blueprint in the 50th anniversary.
I will.
What was I going to say?
Well, you were talking about how...
It made me also think about how it was a process where I was sort of assimilating stuff, absorbing ideas, and they all kind of came together when I got the idea for the book.
And again, it was just, I don't know, just luck or just being at the right place at the right time.
But I think there was some interest in some of the major publishing companies to do a Chicano book, right?
And a lot of them did a Chicano book.
That was it.
But I approached Macmillan among probably a couple others maybe.
And they expressed interest right away.
Got me in touch with one of the editors who was excellent.
He directed me along the path.
He went out to work somewhere else and then I got another editor, but it all worked out really well.
But they gave me an advance, which I had to pay off.
That's what advance means.
It wasn't free money.
But so I, you know, I sold enough books.
I paid back the advance.
And over the years, you know, it keeps, you know, every month I get a little check here and there.
But if I had written it in order to make money, I'd have been a poor man.
But it's still out there.
And I'm happy about that.
Yeah.
So there's a lot of stuff that, you know,
you're bringing it out here which is uh it's interesting to me yeah and i think it's gonna be well i mean part of like the reason why i'm doing this oral history is not just for my own project but also because you know like my parents were involved in the chicano movement too and i just don't hear or see a lot of
new work that's recording a lot of different perspectives on it and from the people who were there, right?
Like there's a lot of, there's a lot of books about it, but it's, you know, from these very, um, you know, how the historians, they call it like this great man type of approach to history.
Right.
So you only look at Cesar Chavez, you only look at
Corky Gonzalez, but you're not talking to the people, you know, the nameless, the nameless people who, I mean, not that you're particularly nameless, but, you know, people who were not those central figures, right?
And so I wanted to kind of record that and, you know, be able to collect those memories from people
who were there and well I before we maybe move on to the next big question I do want to kind of chat with you a little bit about the Chicano Manifesto and like what do you see as
Was it for you a project of just documenting?
Was it a project of, you know, here's what the central themes of the Chicano movement were about?
Here's what their philosophy was?
You want me to stop?
Yeah.
Sure.
Yeah, so I was just...
asking you about the chicano manifesto and what you envisioned its purpose to be was it like more descriptive like here's here's what's going on in the chicano movement here's all the different elements or was it was your intention to make it kind of prescriptive like here's what chicanismo is about and you know what i mean well it's uh
Or maybe it's both.
I think it's both and maybe more.
I think it's a synthesizing of all that together into what I think is what a lot of people have.
I think that the manifesto is a kind of a snapshot of what was going on at the time.
but also kind of an idea of what was going on in my mind.
Like I say, all this formative stuff that had been going on from being in the barrio, San Antonio, and then moving on here, going to St.
Mary's and all that kind of stuff.
When I got the idea for the book, at first, I think at first I did think it was going to be
mostly taking different parts of it, like what's going on in Denver and that idea.
I can't, you're asking me to look back and see at what stage something like that particular book became different than just a history.
Because at some point, I must have
sort of morphed from observer, just an observer, just a chronicler, into someone who actually had an idea about what the movement was about, what Chicanismo was about.
And in your case, you're studying to be a doctor of philosophy, a real philosophy, not just a PhD in the
sort of normative sense, you know, like everybody gets a PhD, it's a doctor.
So more in the sense of what did it mean?
How should people view Chikanismo?
And so everything kind of came together in that sense that I was able to see sort of the whole picture.
from poor boys in Washington, D.C.
This is what's interesting about my going to Washington, D.C.
Remember how I said something about how you can get involved in something to the extent that you don't see what's going on around it, right?
This becomes the focus.
This is your commitment.
Boom, that's it.
And because I went to Washington, D.C., I didn't get into that groove.
So I wasn't committed to the grape work, the grape strike,
I saw them as pieces of a whole.
And you're attributing that to being kind of like removed, like not fully entrenched in those communities, but...
Yeah, people talk about seeing an issue from face-to-face or from 30,000 feet, that sort of thing.
I was able to kind of see what was going on and then put it all together.
And it torn my mind in terms of how I saw not only the Chicano movement as a...
and actively moving forward type of thing, but what it meant to people in terms of mindset, a philosophy, if you will.
Why become a Chicano?
So I think that's why you have one of the chapters toward the end is a really personal,
I call it a personal manifesto, in fact, where I talk about some of these things that were mentioned here, but without getting as much depth, because, you know, if you're talking about a book here, I'm just, I don't know.
Yeah.
Yeah, shining away.
But so all of that, those formative years sort of came together with the manifesto.
Mm-hmm.
And you can kind of see all the circumstances that took place for me to be in Washington, D.C., you know.
Yeah.
Otherwise, I couldn't have written it.
I don't think someone who was in California and had the focus of, you know, just farm workers and all this could have written the book, or nor somebody that was just in New Mexico.
They would have written a book about the Langdon movement, most likely, you know.
Or, I mean, I think about, like, my parents were members of Teatro Campesino during that time period, probably both, like, around 68, 69, 70.
And, like, when my dad talks about it, he talks about, you know, that they did a lot of tours throughout the United States.
And that that was kind of like what you're saying that they got or at least speaking for himself, that he got a glimpse of these different aspects of the Chicano movement.
Right.
But I think that, you know, is my dad going to write a book like Chicano Manifesto?
Probably not, because that's not his.
He's not a writer.
You know, he's an actor.
He's a, well, he calls himself a propagandist.
Oh, yeah.
What's his name?
My dad, Felix Alvarez.
Felix Alvarez.
Yeah, so I think it's just like a different kind of medium, right?
Yeah.
I think that's the point I was thinking about, too, is that someone who's an actor, who sees the world from a different perspective than most people,
would be able to recognize that this is something different and see that it has different moving parts.
And it all becomes part of the teatro.
They would have scenes that would relate to what's going on in New Mexico, maybe you're in Texas or what have you, because they would have become, they absorb that.
And Luis Valdez, he's a master of that.
it comes out in what they do, right?
So what I do is write.
So I had that opportunity to put it all together.
That's why I say I'm not like saying that I'm the only person, I'm just so unique that I would only do it, but the background that I had brought me to that point.
where I had that perspective, you know.
Right.
And I, today, if I hadn't, you know, told myself or, you know, said to myself something like, well, somebody should write this book.
And I answer myself, why don't you write it?
You know, do something about it.
It would never have been written.
You know, if I said, I don't think I can do it.
It's got the kids, you know, I had,
By that time, I had probably at least three and a half kids, I think.
The fourth one was on his way.
He was born in March 1970.
So I was working on the book at that time.
Yeah, I might have just had all kinds of excuses.
Yeah.
I don't know if I would even remember that now, and I would regret it, you know?
But...
Well, anyway, I did.
So let me think if there's anything else I wanted to ask about that.
I don't think so.
It'll probably come up in the next question.
But perhaps before we move on to that second question, is there anything else you want to maybe add about your participation in the Chicano movement?
Well, only to say that I never participated as such.
I'm not in the sense like probably the only place where I had a real involvement was when we were in California with, you know, the farm worker movement and the grape boycott and where, you know, we would pack the kids up and go to a,
the Lucky's in Sacramento.
And we have a picture of two of the first two kids in a cart, you know, a grocery cart, Lucky's grocery cart, you know, walking around.
pretty bold, using our own cards to wheel our kids around.
So I wasn't a participant in the Langrand movement or in the Corpus Christi or Corgi Gonzalez.
It wasn't like being aloof, but I was in Washington, D.C.
The only possible part of the movement that has really not been, and I did very little on it in the book, was the activism among federal workers, people that went to work in Washington, D.C.
and made a big difference in how laws were structured and how policies were implemented, like in bilingual education programs, housing programs.
A lot of stuff went on at that level that I don't think has ever really been properly addressed.
And you would include that?
within the Chicano movement?
Oh, yeah.
Absolutely.
I spent a little bit on it because one of the, it was called the Huarache Walkout.
And I think, what was it?
I think it took place in New Mexico around 1969 or so.
And that's where there was a bunch of federal employees brought together or something to discuss whatever.
They basically walked out because the whole program was directed at boosting the administration and so forth and not really addressing issues that were vital to the Americans.
I mentioned that in the Manifesto, but yeah, I think that was a very important one.
Again, Lyndon Johnson had a lot to do with it.
I don't know if he actually realized what he was doing, but he was certainly instrumental.
And so after, or maybe in the process of writing Chicano Manifesto, that's when you kind of
You took on that identity as a Chicano?
No, I accepted that.
Beforehand.
Oh, yeah, like the late 60s, when it became more prominent, especially after the crucifixist meetings where it started to become current.
Nobody was a Chicano until about then, late 60s, right?
Yeah.
All right.
So let me go ahead and kind of pivot to my next question, which is a lot more related to my dissertation project.
And that deals with the concept of mestizaje, which you're familiar with mestizaje?
Of course.
Okay.
So, part of what I'm trying to understand or uncover in these interviews is where people who are coming of age or who are, you know, young adults during this time period, where they...
It's one of these kind of principles that comes out and becomes popularized, especially in the U.S., right?
During and after the Chicano movement.
And so I'm curious to find out whether there was any effect between people's involvement with the Chicano movement and their understanding of mestizaje or
You know, what is your understanding of that concept?
Where do you think it came from?
Did you identify with it?
Those types of questions.
Well, first of all, just not so much to correct you, but to put a different spin on what you just said about before and after the Chicana movement.
I don't think the Chicana movement is an after.
There's an after to it.
It's a continuation.
Mm-hmm.
not, you know, there's some people that are still protesting in the Chicano power and all this, but it's a continuum and it's evolving pretty much all the time.
So having said that, I think what
one of the elements that makes it still alive is Mestizaje, the sense of indigeneity, I'll put it that way too, okay?
As the dominant basis on which we identify as Mexican Americans, or we Mexican Americans identify as a people, let me put it that way.
Because...
When I wrote Chicano Manifesto, there's several places where I talk about a need for us to align ourselves with Indian tribes.
And I don't think I quite...
put it out there that we were another tribe.
I had to read the whole thing over again to see if I specifically said it like that.
I kind of looked through it every now and then to see if there's any nuance of that sort.
But I think I was mostly thinking of
Mexican-Americans as, well, Mexican-Americans, you know, just a mixture of Indian and Spanish, right?
And I think most Mexican-Americans, the people who became Chicanos, pretty much had the same sort of lack of vision at the time.
Lack of vision?
Yeah, in terms of
what it really meant to be Mexican-American.
In the sense that we talked about being indigenous, but we didn't really accept what that really meant.
We didn't necessarily understand what we were saying, because we hadn't really thought it out.
And, you know, had we had more of that kind of discussion, what it means in terms of how we should think, how we should form our thoughts and our actions with that concept in mind.
And I think right now where many of us are, and this is part of the blueprint, is our need to
really discovered what that indigeneity means.
And my way of thinking is that it has become the dominant element of our being.
Because that's how we're going to survive.
That's a whole different discussion.
I became aware of it
more so in the mid-'80s about my indigenous indigeneity, let's put it there, Mesisaje, because I became involved, actually working with Indian tribes at a different level, different basis.
But in the late 60s, I think the whole idea of Mesisaje, of our being...
you know, Browns, part of the Browns nation and all that, really evolved out of Lorista, the poet, okay, and what he brought out in the Crusade for Justice.
I think it was the first meeting was in 68 or something.
The Plan Espiritual.
Yeah, that was like 68, I think.
Or rather, sometime.
And...
So that gave a lot of the philosophical ideological groundwork, framework for the Chicano movement.
But again, we didn't like sit down and really talk about it.
What does it mean?
What does it mean in terms of how we relate to all this colonial stuff that's now in colonialism that we now realize
still undergird so much of the oppression and the discrimination and racism that Mexican Americans still have to deal with day to day.
Just have to look at the headlines, as they say, what's going on on the border.
Now, I hear
the reports that most of the people infected along the border are from Central America.
Which is not to say that it doesn't really include us, because it does.
As far as this administration, perhaps others, we're brown and that's down.
So it doesn't matter who
where they come from.
They're brown people and they're part of all these migrants that are here and shouldn't belong here.
So I think that was the origin of what I would call the philosophical base where Chicanismo is still to be, I think, really addressed.
Possibly more of the people that are in the SMAP are addressing it and looking at it in terms of what it means down the road.
I still have not heard.
You're the first person from SMAP
that has really gotten back to me and said, you know, like they're interested in the whole question of estisaje, you know?
And I've run across a few things on academia.edu, you know, which relate to it.
I really think that a group like SMAP, other scholars, historians, so forth, anthropologists really have to look at this, our indigeneity, and examine it, evolve it, and put it in... Is that me or you?
I think that's you.
Oh, that's it.
This is from San Antonio.
Okay, yeah, so we were just talking about, you were talking about Mesisahe and, you know, this kind of reshifting of focus to the indigeneity aspect of it, right?
And that actually raises a question for me because
when you, it sounds like when you are thinking about the concept of mestizaje, you're focusing more on the indigenous part of it.
Would that be accurate?
Absolutely, absolutely.
I think, well, the future of our existence here in the Americas is, I think, based on our
I guess focusing is a good word.
It's like giving a balance, I would think, more with respect to our indigenous origins.
Because up until now, by and large, the Hispanic side has been dominant.
This is cool.
We have a Spanish language and we have customs.
We have a certain religiosity from it.
But I think we have to kind of like look at the indigeneity and see how that not only should have more attention, but in terms of our future, that that's where it's at.
And not in somehow being more
It's not possible unless we start to talk with a lisp.
We're not going to do that.
Or maybe lose sight of who we are from that standpoint.
Because that's what makes us Mexican-Americans.
A Chicano is basically a Mexican-American.
But as I said in the Chicano Manifesto,
We are Indians with Spanish surnames, okay?
Because if it had, you know, outside of the whole process that took place in terms of the Spanishization, is that right?
that one part of it, the Hispanicity, has been dominant.
And for no other reason than that at one point there was a concerted effort to erase our connection with our indigenous origins, you know, both in terms of languages, which
has not been successful.
I don't speak Nahuatl or any other native language, but a lot of people do.
And I think even more and more Mexicanos and Mexicans are speaking it, studying it, what have you.
So it could become another language that we speak, that our children could speak.
And certainly to be able to relate and communicate
I forget the numbers, but there's a million or two people at least that speak Nahuatl.
Plus all the other languages that exist, right?
So it's, I think it's a time right now for us to begin to look at our indigenous origins and sort of revive them
not just preserve them, but make them more of a part of our actual existence.
Now, I'm 80 years old.
I don't think I'm going to learn Nahuatl.
I tried.
I tried on my own and it didn't work out.
But I do have a greater sense of the fact that I have indigenous
blood, indigenous origins.
You look at my, this is my side of the family here.
They're a mixture.
My grandmother, you see her here down here, and that's my grandfather, Pomposo.
The one's right below the lamp?
Yeah, that's pomposo reina.
And then my grandmother, she might have had some Spanish blood in her, but I doubt it.
It's just my father, the guy in the cowboy hand at the end, he probably has more Spanish blood that I kind of, as far as my DNA,
the test that I took and they got the findings, pretty much split between Spanish and indigenous, really half and half.
I mean, there's about five or six percent that's a lot of both, you know, things, but some basically, you know, half and half.
Other people are 30 percent more, 30 percent Indian or 70 percent, you know, Spanish.
But I didn't need to know that in order to realize that, yeah, I'm Mexican, I'm Indian native, and I also have Spanish origins.
But I want to learn more about my indigenous background.
And I want to be able to see
or at least, how can I put it, try to assure that 50 years from now, we don't look back or there's people looking back at the remnants of the Mexican-American community and then look back and say, damn, what are those people doing in those days?
They didn't do a damn thing to, you know, to preserve our culture, to pass it on.
to make it stronger, to make it real.
And that's just something that we were saying, viva la raza and all that kind of stuff.
Somos indios and this and that.
So I don't want that to happen 50 years from now, somehow.
When you talk about mestizaje,
Like, here's what I hear you saying is that Mesizaje is the mix of indigenous and Spanish.
But that we have been too focused on trying to elevate or emphasize or follow that kind of Spanish lineage of it.
And what we need to be doing is kind of
going on that other path, like taking kind of that other path.
So in some ways, like I think about, um, you know, like somebody like Vasconcelos who talks about Mesisa as being this mixture, right.
Or, or even people earlier than that, like, um, Bolivar who will say, well, we're not Indian and we're not Spanish.
We're something different or something new.
Right.
And Vasconcelos has kind of like a similar type of angle on it, right?
That it is this third kind of thing.
But it sounds like that's not necessarily what you're describing or how you understand it.
That it is, it's almost like a fork in the road.
We've been on this fork for a while.
And now it's time to maybe cross over and be on this fork.
Is that correct?
Okay.
Here's what I believe.
And I have some evidence for it, a little bit of evidence for it.
Certainly in my own case, how I feel about my mestizaje.
And that is that I, like I can't be more Hispanic.
Pardon the word.
At least I'm using it as an adjective.
I can't be more Hispanic than I already am.
I don't necessarily want to, you know.
I want to improve my ability to write in Spanish because I'm not very good at writing in Spanish, but I speak it and I understand it and so forth.
But I would love to be just more fluid and more fluent in Spanish, right, in writing it.
But that's different from saying that I want to be more of a Hispano.
What really draws me in terms of whatever years I have going for me and what I see for our community, Mexican-Americans, is that in order to preserve what we have, we have to
as a people, as being a people, as a nation.
I use that term in the Chicano Manifesto, and I use it in the blueprint here and there, that the future of this continent, I should say both continents, North and South America, does not lie in more espanidad.
Because there are
dozens of hundreds of indigenous tribes, let's put our nation, but people, people is a better word, it's more international value in terms of international law and all that.
We have all these different peoples who are indigenous in this country and they have survived.
They are surviving.
And
since we've already been Hispanicized, there's this other part of us that needs to be looked at.
And I think it's what gives us that entree to communicate and align ourselves with other peoples that are indigenous to this country.
And to a great extent, we are recognized as a tribe.
American Indians.
The term that's been used in the U.S.
Census is Mexican-American Indians.
In the 2010 census, they found, and I can give you some evidence of this, there's actually a, I might be able to find it if you need it, but there were 175,000 people, that was one of them, who identified ourselves as Mexican-American Indians.
you put the being of Indian origin and Mexican American ethnicity and that comes out with a Mexican American Indian so they made up this category right let's say they reach people that identify them like this so there's 175,000 of them and as such it is the fifth largest tribe
among all the tribes in the United States.
Only I think the Navajo and the Apache and a few others are bigger.
Only four other tribes, recognized tribes, are bigger than 175,000 people.
You know, just out of the blue, so to speak.
Yeah.
Have you heard of, there's a group, I don't know entirely what their actions have been lately, but the group is called Identify Native 2020, the 2020 census.
I haven't heard of that.
You have?
No, I haven't.
Yeah, and it's really interesting because a lot of their kind of, well, mostly what they do, I think, is try to get the word out that, A, if you are, if your ancestors are from this side of the world, you're indigenous.
And the more indigenous people come out and, you know, claim their indigeneity,
then the more, you know, the invaders will recognize that they're outnumbered here.
Yeah.
Follow me on this point.
I think it is in the manifesto and I've written about it in other instances.
I even gave a talk in Kuralavaka back in the beginning of August where I talked about the blueprint
And I pointed out that Mexico should recognize the 40 million Mexicanos that are here.
Not just in terms of, well, there's a bunch of Mexicans over there, people who see their Mexican origin, but good extent of recognizing this as
giving us citizenship, citizenship, just by signing a piece of paper, you know?
Yeah.
But that's very, very extreme, but sort of recognizing that there are 40 million or so, I suppose that doesn't include the undocumented, but all those many kind of running around this country and
We have one of the largest gross domestic product, GDP, of I think like 12, only 12 other countries in the world have a higher GDP than we do.
As a people, as Mexican Americans.
Which is, I think Mexico is one of the larger than that.
So economically, let alone in terms of just voting and so forth, we represent a, you know, a big amount of possibilities there, you know?
Right, right.
Yeah, and I think that's their kind of point, the identifying Native in 2020.
Yeah, is to just... But I don't know if that's an ideological concept that they're working on and through or under, but...
uh more perhaps in terms of programs and money going to uh you know this community or other right um i actually i mean i'm not sure it may have those kinds of consequences as well but i think the main the main kind of role of of that campaign identify native 2020 is
to simply demonstrate to our own people that hey when we come together we're we're massive right and i think that's that's kind of like the bigger point of not necessarily oh what are we going to get from the government or anything like that or or to even kind of like
tread on whatever kind of relationships or negotiations are had between you know the quote-unquote recognized tribes within the u.s and the u.s government but i think it's just a demonstration to ourselves and to also everybody else this is a big group you need to contend with it's cool i have to look into that yeah um i don't know if i'm facebook friends with you but um
I'll send it to you.
And what is it?
What is it?
Recognize your native?
What is the term?
Identify native.
Identify native, okay.
Yeah.
You know that in 1979, I was hired by the V.S.
Census Bureau to go to work on the 1980 census.
And I was...
At that time, I was the only one in what they call the Census Promotion Office from 1980 who was Chicano.
And I was given the task of leading the campaign or starting the campaign or putting together a campaign
to get Latinos in the U.S.
to answer the census.
One guy.
One guy for all those millions.
Yeah.
Fortunately, I mean, they put a lot of money into it.
I mean, I spent millions of dollars literally coming up with different ideas and programs and stuff.
But to this day,
given what it was in 1970 and what happened in 1980, I think we found out there were a lot more Mexicans than we thought, for one thing.
But yeah, so that was my job.
And by the way, I was also given the task of reaching out to the native tribes.
So one guy is supposed to do all this stuff, right?
I hope they have more for 1990 or 2020.
2020, yeah.
So let me go back to the question of mestizaje.
And so some of the things you mentioned was that you felt like maybe some kind of origin of this concept during the Chicano movement occurred with Alorista.
And the Plan de Aslan.
And I'm curious if prior to that, did you have any knowledge of this concept?
Did you identify as mestizo prior to that?
I had a sense that I was a mestizo.
Mexican-American families, and that is where being Indian was looked down upon, as you probably know.
And there was the same discrimination took place among Mexican families for decades, generations, where you didn't really talk about being Indian.
Except once in a while, I remember the phrase, se le salio l'Indio.
you know, which is kind of a put down.
Somebody got really mad or they did something, you know, shocking or whatever, which is like the Indian came out and he or she did this terrible thing.
So there's kind of an internal discrimination toward the indigeneity.
We didn't have all those fancy words for it.
Yeah.
So it was kind of a put down in my own family.
I didn't know who my grandfather, what his origins were until my grandmother died.
And there was a whole story there, which I won't bore you with.
It's kind of a funny story.
But until she died, it was in 1974, I think.
where I finally found out that he was Kickapoo and that her origins too, you know, because of this thing that had happened some years back.
She did not want anybody talking about pomposo or indios or anything like that.
Look at her.
She looked kind of nice and smiling, but boy, she was tough.
She raised eight kids by herself, you know, which is part of the story.
So, you know, out of this background, it was kind of like the door was closed on that.
And like I say, when she died, I came to the funeral, I had a chance to talk to
And the whole story started to come out and I realized, geez, it's really true.
This is what the background is.
And then I did more research and I know more about those origins and stuff.
Now, something that's related to this whole discussion is the fact that
there is a historical and intellectual basis for indigeneity beyond just having family and all this.
It can become lost in history.
I would say that
like in my case and so forth.
So we have to kind of either find that out or get a sense of what it means to be indigenous.
If you don't know your tribe, you can't relate to something specifically.
There's this whole area of discussion and research and analysis and so forth and discussion that needs to take place.
I think that's where our future lies, getting that kind of understanding.
So I didn't find out this particular part of my life, my specifics, until the mid-70s.
And it wasn't until 1985 or so.
I went back to in 1970...
was when I started, probably 74.
I went back to get a degree, an advanced degree, and I chose law.
So I finally got a law degree in 83.
It took me like five years.
I was also working full time at American University.
I was teaching and then running a program for Latino
young adults in the Mario.
But when I decided on law, I've been thinking about getting an advanced degree so I could get more money at American University where I was teaching.
And nothing really was that interesting, nor was it that inviting in terms of the requirements for a doctorate.
And law, when I thought about law, I said, yeah, that's what I want to do.
Because I'd always had an interest in the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo.
There was some time in the manifesto to it.
So it took me five years to get to the point where my last year or last semester, I spent
writing a paper on Chicano, on the treaty.
It's in the back of this book, and we'll get to it.
And I was very lucky to get one of the top jurists in the international law who was teaching it at American University at that time, Tom Bergenthal.
He was my, what do you call it here?
Sponsor, whatever.
Like advisor.
Advisor for it, yeah.
It was an independent study.
So I really studied the treaty, and I went all the way back to the Constitution, the U.S.
Constitution, to look at the law, international law, and its development over that period of time.
Because I think the Constitution is an international document.
So as that evolved, I got more and more of a sense that Mexican-Americans are a treaty people.
As most of the tribes in the United States are based on a treaty.
So that gives us more of a traditional
relationship as a people than simply having DNA in us.
There's a basis in international law, the laws of sovereignty and so forth that connect us and various tribes that recognize that.
We have a treaty between the US and Mexico that we're the third party.
In fact, American Indians, other tribes are third parties also.
Anyway, please try to read through it.
It's kind of boring.
I'll get through there.
Well, that is kind of interesting because it allows for kind of multiple pathways that are not just...
you know, genetic, you know, oh, our ancestors are from this hemisphere and this land in particular, right?
But also something that kind of speaks to the way that indigenous sovereignty has been, you know, established in the U.S.
itself, right?
So yeah, that's really interesting.
That's one of the requirements of nationhood.
That you have some basis for a sovereign status.
Yeah.
Now, again, it's one of those things that I've thrown out there, you know.
No one has really picked up on it yet.
But it's another area for discussion, for elaboration.
One of the
fellows I'm working with on the blueprint, he's very much interested.
So I hope that he picks up the baton, so to speak.
Yeah, and I think it's... I think what's interesting about it is that it kind of... It allows for those people who say, you know, we don't need recognition from the United States.
We don't need European paradigms to tell us we are who we are, right?
But it also...
addresses that too and says, hey, look, in your own language, this is what we are, right?
That's right.
I try to make the case for it.
I think it's valid.
In fact, make it some water.
Would you like some water?
Sure.
We'll take some more.
Okay, so yeah, we were just talking about the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo and
what sorts of kind of implications that would have for Mexican-American Chicanos to identify or kind of get closer to... When you talk about mestizaje, in a way, it's a construct.
It's like races.
I just saw the other day where somebody mentioned that human beings are like 99% the same.
And all the attributes like, you know, color your hair, eyes, you know, skin color, whatever, are just attributes.
Accidents in the classical term, you know?
Yeah.
So we spent so much time.
We have also in the White House, who's totally oblivious of these things, but he's, you know, he's promoting them.
causing all kinds of havoc in our country.
Yeah.
Well, we should go in the other direction.
Anyway, so the whole, I think, as you were suggesting, it provides a whole, an array of different ways of looking at mestizaje.
There's sort of the juridical basis for it.
international law.
There's the genetic, the DNA.
You can look at something people who maybe didn't even know they were Indian, you know, might look at their DNA and they find out, oh damn, you know, my grandparents were both apaches, you know.
What does that make me?
A quarter apache.
And so you have that, and then you have the
maybe theoretical or philosophical way of looking at it, you know?
So there's all this, and maybe there's some other, you know, something I haven't thought about, or maybe we've mentioned it, but... Well, I think another one, too, is the sort of spiritual...
That's not the right word.
Theoretical, maybe, way of looking at it, you know, which goes beyond just the DNA, but, you know, where you begin to live a native life.
I don't mean like, you know, you go on a reservation, but your orientation to the environment, to interact
wildlife you know all those kind of things come into play if you're an indigenous person right right it's different yeah if you're if you're an indigenous person you act differently yeah okay um but it raises all kinds of questions like well do i have to change my way of
What about my kids?
Are they going to think I'm crazy?
Or are my kids going to tell me, why are you so back?
Why aren't you becoming or living like an indigenous person, like a native person?
What does that mean?
In terms of an existential...
exist.
There are existential consequences when you recognize that you're an indigenous person.
So where do you go from that?
Yeah, or
It sounds like maybe the tension is how do you live that kind of life in a society that is not, that is practically antithetical to that, right?
How do you orient yourself within that sphere?
That's what's so beautiful going on right now in terms of demographics.
Why do white Americans, or many of them,
Why are they going crazy?
Why are they shooting up people?
That's why the Identifying Native 2020 is important.
Well, I think so.
I think that's almost like another way of looking at it where there are some
good consequences of recognizing that you're native.
I mean, there's political and so forth, and in terms of maybe housing or educational programs or whatever, just like affirmative action had some impact, and it's still having some impact.
So it's good to be native.
But it has consequences.
You're absolutely right.
It has consequences.
yeah um so i think we were kind of before we you were talking about the the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo and and that kind of insight that you had um while you were working on your law degree um i think i was i had asked you about your earliest kind of memories of mistisaje and you were talking about your family and
you know, this idea that to be indigenous was something bad or, you know.
Yeah, it wasn't something that you went around and talking about it.
I remember like going downtown with my grandmother on the, you know, the bus went right down our street, Ray Street in San Antonio.
And there was a, of course, there was the separation of races, you know,
It was an apartheid.
It wasn't even a tripod.
It was like quadruped.
Because, you know, the whites could take all the seats because they were white.
And rather than walk, the whites going in the back, they would stand in the front if there were no seats.
Because they wanted to sit where those people were.
Right.
what do you call it, the pecking order was blacks were like kind of mixed, and then Mexicans, and then Native people, you know, Indians.
So everybody could sit down except the Indians.
There weren't any overseas left.
You know, that's the way it was.
This is in San Antonio?
In San Antonio, you know.
Interesting.
It was, yeah, I mean, I used to go to the Majestic Theater and other ones.
And except for the Mexican theater, which anybody could go in and watch movies.
But the white ones, you had to go in the back door.
upstairs.
So blacks and Mexicanos would have to go on the other entrance.
So that's not very conducive to saying that you're Indian.
And of course there's also, I learned this later on, but there was also, and that's
say, but there was also laws or court cases which established the notion that Mexicans were white, you know, again without necessarily looking at the consequences in terms of the theoretical system.
So that whole notion of
did play in the positive notion or positive effects on Mexican-Americans.
It didn't mean a hell of a lot in terms of the actual behavior of whites or Americanos.
But yeah, we were generally considered white.
You could cite cases where, you know,
Yeah, there's a... I don't know if you're familiar with Ian Haney Lopez, his work.
He's at UC Berkeley.
Yeah, he's got a pretty well-known book called The Wi-Fi Log that kind of covers some of that.
Yeah, interesting.
So... The Messisa has stuff.
Um...
A couple of things, maybe, I mean, I don't know if you would agree with any of this, but some of the things that have been kind of coming up in my other interviews, like my mom, who I interviewed, remembers her dad, my grandfather, telling them we're mestizos, but to be proud of your indigenous part, right?
And this would be like in the 50s that this would be going on.
And then there were some other like similar stories about having kind of an understanding of it from being in church.
And, you know, particularly with like the image of the Virgen de Guadalupe.
And then there was another
another interview I did where the person was kind of explaining that, you know, this idea of mestizaje is not, it's not necessarily something that comes out of the Chicano movement, but it's like this kind of general kind of understanding within the Mexican American community.
And then part of it comes from, you know, this,
that a lot of the Chicanos or the Mexican-Americans of the 60s are still really connected with people or family that experienced the revolution in Mexico.
And when Mesizaje starts becoming kind of more and more pronounced as part of this Mexican national ideology...
So, I mean, I don't know if you agree with any of that or if any of that resonates or not.
My experience was primarily that we didn't talk about it.
I think we all kind of understood it, but it wasn't a topic around the table.
Especially in our household.
It wasn't until...
Certainly, like I said, toward the end of the 60s with the Crusade for Justice and all this, that the whole concept even came, I think, really became like a dominant underlying factor in what Chicanismo is about.
I think we're still discovering what Chicanismo is about.
But I think, from my standpoint, what makes Chicanismo different and an underlying force in Chicanismo and in how our direction should be going, and I think it inevitably will go if it
that we have to recognize that we can't just give lip service, so to speak, to our indigenous background.
It has to become a living part of
and become conscious.
In fact, this evening I'm going to a monthly gathering of hombres who are indigenous and they live that life at an ideological level, intellectually
spiritually, you know.
Are you getting hungry?
I have a little indigestion.
I just took some chunks.
Oh, I have some, what is it, Pepsi?
I forget what it's called.
It's probably just, I like overdid it on coffee today or something.
Oh, yeah, I'm sorry.
No, it's okay.
Yeah.
Um...
So it's a, as I say, my sense is that with respect to the demographics and how things are changing in this country, as I point out in the blueprint, not only if we don't do something about really recognizing the challenges that we face as we become more and more of a majority,
somebody else is still going to be telling us what to do I don't think I put it that bluntly but we definitely have to have reach a point where we can begin to take leadership roles yeah and I I appreciate what you were saying about Chicanismo that it's still kind of like evolving right and we're um
that it's not something that's completely settled yet, but I always think of it as, and especially like what, what was revealed in the, the kind of early days of the Chicano movement is this, uh, demand to the,
for self-determination right um so i think that's you know that's one of those kind of like principle axioms of we didn't we didn't act on it yeah again it was kind of like
It was a sort of an intellectual trip, you know, that started out.
But we never really addressed it.
We didn't have, like, SNAP.
We didn't have a lot of people in scholarship roles to really, like, look at and say, what does this really mean, you know?
to what extent do we have to change our own outlook on life if that's really the case if we are really indigenous people do we focus on that or do we continue being sort of indigenous and be mostly Hispanic and you know follow the route of you know I guess hundreds of thousands before then who had you know gone into school and become you know
middle class or whatever and missed the whole boat.
Not because of their fault or anything like that, but just the nature of the society at that time.
Yeah, and I think some people, I hear even people who are members of SMAP who
You know, anytime a proposition like that comes up, it's always kind of like dismissed or like straw manned, right?
Like, oh, well, we can't.
There's no way we can possibly all become indigenous again, right?
Like we have a, we're in a society.
You're missing the boat.
Well, yeah.
And I think, you know, it's funny to me because to me, it's very kind of
I don't want to say short-sighted, but kind of short-sighted that, like, you're so locked into this kind of colonial mindset that you cannot see your way out of it, you know?
Well, it sounds like someone who thinks like that, you know, so-and-so, fulano tal, you know, is missing...
the whole issue because it is that very question of what does it mean that I'm indigenous?
That is a philosophical question.
Right.
Because just as you might ask, why are we here?
Why did I come on this earth?
Things like that.
Huge questions.
What does it mean that I'm indigenous?
Do I just continue being Hispanic?
Whatever that means, because to me it's hollow.
There's nothing there.
In order to be really Hispanic, you'd have to adopt what was going on in Spain to be the most extreme, let's say.
But we're not Hispanioles.
We're not Argentinian.
We're not even Mexicans as such.
We're something totally different.
Part of it is the fact that we have had to cope with this country.
Yeah.
I've said that at this conference that I've been to twice now.
The first time that I went there a couple of years ago,
I made the point that we are distinct or distinguished in the sense that we're not only Mexican origin and Hispanic origin, that whole mezcla, but we've also had to live in the Valley of the Beast and survive, but we've acquired attributes of being Anglo, whether we like it or not.
We're stuck with it.
Yeah, and that actually brings me to maybe my final question for the interview and kind of takes us back to Chicano Manifesto.
I'm looking for a part in here and I can't find it at the moment, but there was, I think,
It's in one of the first two chapters where you kind of talk about... To me, it sounds very much kind of Vasconcelos-like.
Vasconcelosian?
I don't know what the word would be.
But there's a part in there where you kind of talk about how the Chicano, because of this kind of... You know, he's not...
He's not Mexican.
He's not fully American.
He's a new thing, right?
And there's a comment that you make that this is not only kind of like a new, heralding a new type of outlook on the world, but one that is also...
like beneficial for the rest of humanity or it offers some kind of gift to the rest of humanity I know what you're talking about it's kind of the far out things I think that I talk about there's a lot of other things but
I think I've said something along those lines recently.
I think it was in the Cuernavaca paper.
I should send it to you.
Sure.
But the... It might have been also like prescient in terms of where we are now, where I am now with the blueprint.
And that is that...
this is maybe far out and it's very self-serving, whatever, but we can help save this continent, you know?
And I think it's our role, right?
That, because we understand the whole picture.
We know the Anglos, you know, better than they do themselves, anyways.
But what we don't know,
is our indigenous background.
And we haven't fully recognized it, let alone recognize the sense of accepting it, let alone understanding it, right?
There's a difference.
But we also have a connection, and I pointed out now two times in Guadalajara.
We also have a unique connection with Mexico and the rest of Latin America, okay?
And I think the sooner that Mexico realizes that and starts working with Mexican-Americans here in this country as an indigenous sovereign nation, that things might start to change.
There might be hell to pay.
in some sense, but I guess I put it that the future of America is in our hands.
That's one of the reasons that the whole idea of a 50-year cycle came to my head and not doing what we did the last 50 years, which is not much at this level.
Really thinking through all these different issues, our identity, our need to have a common voice, not have just one person out there
it because you know he can't be the Mexican American candidate he has to be candid for everybody at some level he can talk about issues like immigration and so forth that affect we're not immigrants he has to be saying that we're not immigrants I don't think he's I haven't heard him that often but he hasn't come on and said Mexicans are not immigrants you know
I haven't heard anybody in politics say that.
No, no, no.
Um, but it's, you know, at some point we had to start seeing it.
Yeah.
That's why the other thing about, uh, uh, besides our identity is to have our, what I call our own voice, you know, have a narrative where we all kind of recognize it and we're willing to say, yeah, I'm indigenous and, uh, what, so what, it can't, you know, it can't.
Um,
But I think in some sense that is, that's my, that's my story and I'm sticking to it as they say.
Yeah.
Well, and I appreciate it.
There's, there's parts in, I think it's the Chicano nation chapter where you talk about kind of these regional differences between people who are, who are one, right?
And how, you know, in some ways, like there's a beauty to it because
we recognize that we have different, you know, that we're not all the same, but it also is problematic because then it causes these kind of like needless divisions, right?
And you talk about it just not only in terms of geography, but also in the kind of words that we use to refer to each other or to distinguish ourselves.
So I'm going to look some more into that particular stuff.
But the other kind of question that I wanted to ask you about that particular kind of idea that you had regarding Chicanos being this kind of conduit for, you know, changes, massive kind of changes in the way that we live our lives
in this hemisphere, right?
One question is, is that as Chicanos in particular, or are you talking about like kind of just indigenous people in general?
That's a good point or question.
I would say that...
Again, where my mind is right now is that we have to recognize that we're indigenous above all.
And not everybody's going to accept that, and that's fine.
But we have to have a common understanding of our indigeneity.
And that can only come through, you know, the discussion, interaction, having people that, you know, others will look up to, you know, their scholars or their maybe politicians, perhaps community leaders and so forth who get it, you know, who realize the implications
And that's one of the underlying reasons for the blueprint is that, and I've said this several times now, there is a group that we're working together to build out this idea.
Because if we don't do something, I just hate to think, and I said something like this earlier, 50 years from now, somebody's going to say, look back and say, no, she don't know how to
What the hell were they thinking about?
We're still in the same place we were 50 years ago.
Famous term from the Chicano movement days, especially the entire Vietnam movement, chale, you know, chale.
That was a perfect way of expression, chale, you know, with all this, you know, with the Vietnam War, with, you know, Chicanos being thrown in his father, you know.
I think it's time for Charlie with this kind of like just kind of going with the flow.
We can't do that anymore.
I can't imagine 50 years from now.
I don't want to imagine 50 years from now being in the same boat.
Yeah.
And we have so much potential.
There's 40 million people already here.
And if we unify with all the native people, other native peoples, with Mexico, and all the tribal people that are there, just think about it, you know?
Yeah.
Let me, I'm going to stop because I need to use the restroom.
But I do have one question that I wanted to, hey, stop that.
There you go.
I don't think I did it, no.
my own recollection.
So as I was reading this, I just recently reread
Anzalúa's Borderlands, because I'm also going to be talking about that in my dissertation.
And I kind of noticed like a lot of what she says is kind of what you're saying in here.
And I'm curious, I don't know if you've ever read that book or not.
You've never read it?
No.
Yeah, I was going to ask if you had any kind of comments.
If you had any comments about kind of the, because she makes similar kinds of claims, right?
She read my book.
Probably, right?
That's what I'm wondering.
Yeah.
But the thing is, I don't remember her making any citations to your book.
I'm not surprised.
But, yeah, okay.
Well, that's really kind of all I had to ask about that.
In a way, if it does sound like something that I might have said...
It's an idea, so it's not, you know, I can't copyright it.
Right.
Only if it's a quote from my book and they don't attribute it.
Yeah.
Or something plagiarizes or whatever.
Yeah, I could sue or something, but... Yeah, no, I just see... I want the ideas out, too, you know, so...
Yeah, I see a lot of... Well, because she kind of uses a similar type of argument, which is that the Chicano... Well, really for her, it's a little more along the lines of like the... She calls it the mestiza consciousness, right?
That there is a kind of unique perspective...
That somebody, a Chicana from the border area is going to have about knowledge about the world and that this type of person, this type of person who thinks like this, who has this kind of like borderlands mentality is going to be the person that, you know, brings about these more positive changes.
Yeah.
So it's something that I kind of picked up because your book is out in 71.
Is that right?
Her book, I think she published in 80, like mid 80s.
Well, it probably might have slipped into her.
Yeah.
Um, but okay.
So I just wanted to know if you had read her work and if you had any comments about it.
Um, there's a lot of, a lot of stuff I've not read.
I've wanted to, I've read a few things from, you know, some excerpts and that sort of thing.
Um, so yeah, I have an idea of her thinking.
What I think is, I'm driving at is to look at some of the issues that she's talking about and others are talking about, not from just the paradigm of, you know, Chicanese or Chicana Indigena.
That's a term I think that she used or somebody used of...
I just saw something recently where the writer Jenny Luna sort of came up with the term of Chicana Indigena.
So my reaction to that is that what the blueprint is about is all of us looking at Chicanismo
male or female.
Not even talking about binary genders, the type of things, you know, where people who hit somewhere in the spectrum of gender want to have their day in court, so to speak.
But then we look at it from terms of a statehood, nationhood.
And whoever wants to, you know, put in their oars, so to speak, can do so and should do so.
Mm-hmm.
but let's not get stuck in, you know, questions about binary gender or, you know, certain politics or just ideology because there's a lot of room in this whole thing of the Chicanismo.
And the more that we look at it in terms of, you know, the future,
and where we're going as a people as opposed to just being concerned with one aspect of it.
We should all have a voice that speaks to these issues as well or that lets the concept of whatever you're coming from be what informs you in terms of what the future looks like.
Yeah, and I think part of it is like a distinction between
identity and like self-knowledge or knowledge of of yourself or your community um because i think like the identity stuff gets you into you know like you were talking about the these divisions right these divisions where you want to you want to distinguish yourself i'm i'm this i'm that
And that's not to say that identity is not important, but that it is not just about distinguishing yourself, but about understanding who you are, who your people are.
And I think those are two different things.
And my worry about, you know, all these different kinds of Chicanismos is that it takes away from that
what I think is a more important question about understanding who we are.
Um, but any who is, uh, is there anything you'd like to, I mean, I'm pretty much kind of done with my question.
Is there anything you want to add?
Oh, wow.
Um, yeah.
Is there anything you want to add as a closing or,
I just want to reemphasize the point about the blueprint and that I see it as a way of coming up, evolving, creating, just building on all the experience we've had to establish what our identity is.
And in the broad sense of identity,
in relationship to where we are right now, where we're living right now in the United States, and how we relate to other peoples of indigenous background, which talks to the alliances that are recommended or suggested in the blueprint, and how we address these through literature, to the arts, through our education,
and so on, so that we do begin to recognize, not just recognize the potential we have, because we're not talking about having more votes and that sort of thing, but preparing ourselves for a point in time that's going to be pretty quick in relative terms.
Ten years from now, 20 years from now, when we start to become majority and not only
certain states, but regions and the whole country in alliance with other tribal people that we have to prepare ourselves.
We can't just let things happen and expect the powers that be to give up their powers easily.
So that's why I say that we have a lot of responsibility
you know, at the same time toward the future.
And I'm just talking about our own people.
But whoever is, you know, coming, you know, further on who are going to be a mezcla also, the Angles are going to become mestizos.
It's impossible for them not to.
You know?
I haven't even talked about that.
I mean, technically most of them already are.
All right.
Yeah.
Well, thank you.
I'm going to go ahead and stop this.